[DOCS] EMT Hypervisor Docs (#512)
open-edge-platform/edge-microvisor-toolkit: docs/developer-guide/get-started/deployment/emt-vm-host-setup.md

# Kernel and Host User Space Setup

> Follow the steps below to generate the necessary kernel and userspace files to set up a Ubuntu 22.04 hypervisor for hosting guest VMs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the steps below to generate the necessary kernel and userspace files to set up an Ubuntu 22.04 hypervisor for hosting guest VMs.
```

> > **Note:** a Ubuntu host with SRIOV running on a supported Intel Core platform with iGPU (RPL) is required in order to run Windows VM installation for SR-IOV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** To run Windows VM installation for SR-IOV, you need an Ubuntu host with SR-IOV on a supported Intel Core platform with iGPU (RPL).
```

> Build steps can performed either on a Ubuntu 22.04 host or Ubuntu 22.04 docker container on Ubuntu host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can [build the kernel](#build-iotg-kernel) either on an Ubuntu 22.04 host or in an Ubuntu 22.04 docker container on an Ubuntu host.
```

## Required Host BIOS Settings

| | | |
|---|---|---|
|Intel (VMX) Virtualization|Intel Advanced Menu -> CPU Configuration|Enabled|
|VT-d|Intel Advanced Menu -> System Agent (SA) Configuration|Enabled|
|SRIOV Enable|Intel Advanced Menu -> System Agent (SA) Configuration -> Graphics Configuration|Enabled|
|Intel(R) TCC Mode|Intel Advanced Menu -> Intel(R) Time Coordinated Computing|Disabled|
|#AC Split Lock|Intel Advanced Menu -> Intel(R) Time Coordinated Computing|Disabled|
|Attemp Secure Boot|Boot Maintenance Manager Menu -> Secure Boot Configuration Menu|Disabled|

> > **Note:** ***BIOS menu can vary depending on the release.***

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** ***A BIOS menu can vary depending on the release.***
```

## Install Ubuntu host

1. Download [Ubuntu 22.04 (Jammy Jellyfish) Intel IOT iso](https://cdimage.ubuntu.com/releases/jammy/release/inteliot/ubuntu-22.04-desktop-amd64+intel-iot.iso)

2. Install Ubuntu 22.04 (Jammy Jellyfish):

   ```bash
   # Copy the iso file into a USB drive
   $ sudo dd if=./ubuntu-22.04-desktop-amd64+intel-iot.iso of=/dev/sdX bs=4M && sync

   # Check the boot order number X of the USB drive
   $ sudo efibootmgr

   # Select the USB drive as the next boot device
   $ sudo efibootmgr -n X

   # Reboot into the drive to start the installation

>    $ sudo reboot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   sudo dd if=./ubuntu-22.04-desktop-amd64+intel-iot.iso of=/dev/sdX bs=4M && sync

   # Check the boot order number X of the USB drive
   sudo efibootmgr

   # Select the USB drive as the next boot device
   sudo efibootmgr -n X

   # Reboot into the drive to start the installation
   sudo reboot
```

   ```

> **Note:** If operating behind a corporate firewall, setup proxy settings as required.

> 3. In "Software & Updates" GUI, make sure you're set to download from **Main server**, as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the "Software & Updates" GUI, make sure to download from **Main server**, as shown below:
```

![Software and Updates](./assets/emt-vm-host-setup/image2022-7-21_0-58-12.png)

> 4. Upgrade Ubuntu host software to the latest version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Upgrade the Ubuntu host software to the latest version:
```

   ```bash
   # Upgrade Ubuntu software
   # Generic host kernel installed from Ubuntu may be incompatible with board
   # Therefore after upgrade, continue to install host kernel and firmware before rebooting
   $ sudo apt -y update

>    $ sudo apt -y upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   sudo apt -y update
   sudo apt -y upgrade
```

   ```

## Setup IOTG kernel on Ubuntu Host

### Kernel Setup prerequisites

1. MultiOS virtualization [scripts](https://github.com/intel-innersource/virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts/archive/refs/tags/rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip)

> 2. **kernel-config-6_12.zip** (found inside the above package)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **kernel-config-6_12.zip** (included in the package above)
```

### Build IOTG Kernel

1. Create a working directory:

   ```bash
   # Create a working directory
   $ mkdir <work directory>

>    $ cd <work directory>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   mkdir <work directory>
   cd <work directory>
```

   ```
2. Extract files

   ```bash
   # Extract files
   $ unzip -jo virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip

>    $ unzip -jo kernel-config-6_12.zip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   unzip -jo virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip
   unzip -jo kernel-config-6_12.zip
```

   ```

> 3. Build Kernel debian files and package them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Build the Kernel debian files and package them:
```

   ```bash
   # build kernel debs
   $ ./sriov_prepare_kernel.sh

   # package deb files
   $ cd sriov_build

>    $ find . -name "*.deb"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ./sriov_prepare_kernel.sh

   # package deb files
   cd sriov_build
   find . -name "*.deb"
```

   ./linux-headers-6.12.xx-lts2024-iotg_xxxx_amd64.deb
   ./linux-image-6.12.xx-lts2024-iotg-dbg_amd64.deb
   ./linux-image-6.12.xx-lts2024-iotg_xxxx_amd64.deb
   ./linux-libc-dev_6.12.xx-xxxx_amd64.deb
   ```

> 4. Create **lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz** package and copy it to the working directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Create the **lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz** package and copy it to the working directory:
```

   ```bash
   # Create lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz
   $ tar czvf lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz *.deb

   # copy to working dir
   $ cd -

>    $ cp sriov_build/lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   tar czvf lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz *.deb

   # copy to working dir
   cd -
   cp sriov_build/lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz .
```

   ```

### Install IOTG host kernel on Ubuntu SR-IOV host

> 1. Boot into Ubuntu Host OS go to the work directory"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Boot into the Ubuntu Host OS and navigate to the work directory:"
```

   ```bash
   # Change to work directory

>    $ cd ~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   cd ~
```

   ```

> 2. Copy source files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Copy the source files:
```

   ```bash
   # Copy files
   $ cp <source path>/lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz .

>    $ cp <source path>/virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   cp <source path>/lts2024-iotg-kernel-rel.tar.gz .
   cp <source path>/virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip .
```

   ```

3. Extract the script files:

   ```bash
   # Extract script files

>    $ unzip -jo virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   unzip -jo virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip
```

   ```

> 4. Perform Kernel Setup and Reboot Ubuntu Host:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Perform the kernel setup and reboot the Ubuntu host:
```

   ```bash
   # Perform kernel setup
   # This will install kernel and firmware, and update grub
   $ sudo ./sriov_setup_kernel.sh

   # Reboot Ubuntu host

>    $ sudo reboot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   # Perform the kernel setup
   # This will install the kernel and firmware, and update grub
   sudo ./sriov_setup_kernel.sh

   # Reboot the Ubuntu host
   sudo reboot
```

   ```

> ### Setup Ubuntu host for SR-IOV usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Setup Ubuntu host for SR-IOV
```

> 1. Boot into the Ubuntu Host OS and navigate to work directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Boot into the Ubuntu Host OS and navigate to the work directory:
```

   ```bash
   # Change to work directory

>    $ cd ~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   # Go to the work directory
   cd ~
```

   ```

> 2. Extract files from `sriov_patches.zip` (found inside `virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Extract files from `sriov_patches.zip` (included in `virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip`)
```

   ```bash
   # Extract files

>    $ $ unzip sriov_patches.zip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   unzip sriov_patches.zip
```

   ```

> 3. Update the host with extracted patches, and reboot the host:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Update the host with extracted patches and reboot the host:
```

   ```bash
   # Update the host
   $ sudo ./sriov_setup_ubuntu.sh

   # Reboot the host

>    $ sudo reboot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   sudo ./sriov_setup_ubuntu.sh

   # Reboot the host
   sudo reboot
```

   ```

>    > **Note:** If you need to run any reliability or benchmark test on the host, please run the following commands to disable auto suspend and hibernation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **Note:** If you need to run any benchmarks or reliability tests on the host, make sure to disable auto suspend and hibernation by running the following commands:
```

   ```bash
   # disable suspend and hibernate service
   $ sudo systemctl mask sleep.target suspend.target hibernate.target hybrid-sleep.target
   # reboot Ubuntu host

>    $ sudo reboot now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   # Disable the suspend and hibernate services
   sudo systemctl mask sleep.target suspend.target hibernate.target hybrid-sleep.target
   # Reboot the Ubuntu host
   sudo reboot now
```

   ```

### OPTIONAL: Generate guest VM installation files

> You can generate guest VM installation files by either running an initial full setup on a  Ubuntu 22.04 host with SR-IOV installed, or by generating the files in an Ubuntu 22.04 docker container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can generate guest VM installation files by either running an initial full setup on an Ubuntu 22.04 host with SR-IOV installed, or by generating the files in an Ubuntu 22.04 docker container.
```

#### Option 1: Initial full setup of Ubuntu 22.04 SRIOV host

Follow the steps in the earlier sections to perform a full initial setup on the first host OS.

> If you have completed [Install IOTG host kernel on Ubuntu SR-IOV host](#install-iotg-host-kernel-on-ubuntu-sr-iov-host) and [Setup Ubuntu host for SR-IOV usage](#setup-ubuntu-host-for-sr-iov-usage), you should have two directories containing the install files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have performed a full initial setup of the first host OS, that is, installation of [IOTG host kernel](#install-iotg-host-kernel-on-ubuntu-sr-iov-host) and [SR-IOV](#setup-ubuntu-host-for-sr-iov) on Ubuntu, there should be the `packages` and `sriov_install` directories with install files.
```

- `packages`

> - `sriov_install`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Copy these directories to use in future setups on second or subsequent hosts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy these directories to use in future setups of the second or subsequent hosts.
```

```bash

> # Copy out the directories containing the install files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Copy the directories containing the install files
```

$ cp -r packages <target path>

> $ cp -r sriov_install <target path>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cp -r packages <target path>
cp -r sriov_install <target path>
```

```

> #### Option 2: Ubuntu 22.04 docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Option 2: Ubuntu 22.04 Docker container
```

> Alternatively, the install files can be generated by performing the following steps in an Ubuntu docker container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, the install files can be generated in an Ubuntu docker container by performing the following steps:
```

```bash
# Update and upgrade Ubuntu docker container
sudo apt update

> sudo apt upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo apt -y update
sudo apt -y upgrade
```

# Copy the script files
$ cp <source path>/virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip .

# Extract files
$ unzip -jo virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip

> $ unzip sriov_patches.zip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cp <source path>/virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip .

# Extract files
unzip -jo virtualization.multios.kvm.scripts-rpls_sriov_kvm_multios_emt-3.1_ww2525.zip
unzip sriov_patches.zip
```

# Prepare and create install files
sudo ./sriov_prepare_projects.sh
sudo ./sriov_install_projects.sh

> # Copy out the directories containing the install files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Copy the directories containing the install files
```

# Setting up Kernel and Host User Space

Follow the steps below to generate the necessary kernel and userspace files
to set up an Ubuntu 22.04 hypervisor for hosting guest VMs.

> **Note:** To run Windows VM installation for SR-IOV, you need an Ubuntu host

> > with SR-IOV on a supported Intel Core platform with iGPU (RPL).

Reviewer 2: Why only mentioning RPL and not all platforms supporting it?

Author: Wording changed to more general, without specifying just RPL

## Install Ubuntu host

1. Download [Ubuntu 22.04 (Jammy Jellyfish) Intel IOT ISO](https://cdimage.ubuntu.com/releases/jammy/release/inteliot/ubuntu-22.04-desktop-amd64+intel-iot.iso)

2. Install Ubuntu 22.04 (Jammy Jellyfish):

   ```bash
   # Copy the iso file into a USB drive
   sudo dd if=./ubuntu-22.04-desktop-amd64+intel-iot.iso of=/dev/sdX bs=4M && sync

   # Check the boot order number X of the USB drive
   sudo efibootmgr

   # Select the USB drive as the next boot device
   sudo efibootmgr -n X

   # Reboot into the drive to start the installation
   sudo reboot
   ```

> **Note:** If operating behind a corporate firewall, setup proxy settings as required.

3. In the **Software & Updates** GUI, make sure to download from **Main server**, as shown below:

   ![Software and Updates](./assets/emt-vm-host-setup/ubuntu-softwareupdates.png)

4. Upgrade the Ubuntu host software to the latest version:

   ```bash
   # Upgrade Ubuntu software
   # Generic host kernel installed from Ubuntu may be incompatible with board
   # Therefore after upgrade, continue to install host kernel and firmware before rebooting
   sudo apt -y update
   sudo apt -y upgrade
   ```

> ## Setup IOTG kernel on Ubuntu Host

Reviewer 2: Should we be using the term 'IOTG' kernel?

Author: Wording "IOTG" Kernel changed to more general "Custom Intel Kernel" in all occurrences
